So welcome, Kevin. Thank you so, so much for coming along today. What an amazing way to
start the week. I really appreciate your time here. So for those who are not familiar with
yourself or with your work, how would you introduce yourself? Well, I am Kevin Aho. I'm a professor
of philosophy at Florida Gulf Coast University. I've been here in Florida since 2004 at this
university. And I'm also the chair of the Department of Communication and Philosophy
at the university right now. I did, I had kind of a convoluted journey through graduate school.
I started out at the new school for social research in New York City and then moved to
University of Utah and Salt Lake City and then finished up my PhD at the University of South
Florida in Tampa, where I studied with a very important figure in existential philosophy,
an especially Heidegger, a fellow named Charles Guillaume, who sadly passed away this past summer,
but had a long and influential career and taught a lot of students. And so that's that's the brief
condensed version of who I am. And I consider myself a specialist in existential philosophy,
phenomenology of the body, and areas of existential psychotherapy and phenomenological
psychotherapy. Now, phenomenology of the body is not something that I come across people saying
a lot as their specialties. Yeah, yeah, it's a it's a it's a booming field right now. It's
largely indebted to the renewed interest in the work of Maurice Meryl Ponte and some important
and seminal feminist figures, obviously, Simone de Beauvoir, one and Iris Marion Young, another
figure. And it's simply a recognition that the body is not something we have, and that we're
only contingently connected to. It's who we are, we are our bodies, we exist through our bodies,
we live through the vehicle of our bodies. And so it's an attempt to undermine that classic
Cartesian dualism that the human being is composed of two distinct substances and an immaterial mind
in a causally determined body. And phenomenology undoes that dualism in helpful ways.
So you spoke slightly about your your kind of academic journey into this amazing field of
philosophy and of existentialism. But what drew you to want to specialize in existentialism in
the first place? How did you stumble upon this, this particular? Yeah, it's a good question. I came
from a family of intellectuals. My father was a professor of sociology, but mostly kind of German
social theory and was raised, came of age during the counterculture revolution in the 60s and early
70s, when existentialism was all the rage and everyone was carrying around tattered copies of
Camus and Sartre and Beauvoir. And and my parents met in graduate school. And so I was surrounded
by books growing up. And I in my second semester of college, I was actually an engineering major
in college, believe it or not. And the second semester of college, I read Dostoevsky's The
Brothers Karamazov during the winter break. And the book had a transformative impact on me.
And it raised all of these deep existential questions about the meaning of life, the existence of
God, the problems of nihilism, the experiences of anxiety and the face of death. And it awakened
me to the fact that I've had these experiences. I feel this in my everyday life. And I changed
my major to philosophy and never looked back. And many other aspects of philosophy I find
uninteresting and boring, metaphysics and epistemology, even much of ethics, moral philosophy,
I find boring and turgid. But existentialism always inspired me and shaped me. And it has stayed
with me since I was 18 or 19 years old. And I had powerful experiences in my early adulthood and
late adolescence of hanging out with my high school friends, you know, getting high and having a few
beers under the stars, and talking about the meaning of life. And what is it all about? And who are
we? And why are we here? And I realized that those were the questions of the existentials, right?
Those are deep and important existential questions. And unfortunately, as we move into adulthood and
find our way into careers and family life, we oftentimes lose touch with those important
questions. And we kind of drift along in our existence until there's a crisis or a breakdown.
And suddenly we wake up again to how important existential thinking is. And so that has kind
of been the arc of my life. It's always been shaped and informed by an existential attitude or an
existential orientation. It sounds like you genuinely connected with the kind of existential
questions and never were able to kind of shake them away rather than stumbling across
a textbook in a formalized module and saying, okay, I better learn this theory. You've felt the
questions within you. That was a visceral experience. It wasn't about a vocation. It wasn't
about even getting a job as a philosophy professor. It was about a way of existing. And so I would be
doing existentialism if I was managing a restaurant or working in middle management somewhere for a
company. I would still be watching existential films, listening to existential music,
reading existential poetry and all of the things that move me, as you say, viscerally or in a
mooted way. Because they speak to the concerns at the core of our condition. These are the ultimate
concerns of our lives. And so yeah, they've had a powerful orienting impact on me.
You bring up something for me, which is the fact that you're going through that phase of life when
you're younger and you're chatting with your friends and you're asking these massive, massive
questions, these really deep questions. And then you fade into a life where you're not
what you're not supposed to be asking these questions. I remember for me, I don't know about
you, but it was kind of almost stigmatized to ask why rather than to just follow, to question
these deep meanings rather than to just pick a career and follow it. I don't know if you can relate
to that. Oh, certainly I can. And it's, you know, just because we are kind of sucked into
the shallows of social convention and go with the flow of everyday life, the existentialists
make it clear that that's not a moral failing. It's not as if you're doing something wrong. It's just
part of the inertia of being human, that we're always going to be, Heidegger has this
language of temptation, we're tempted by the they or the public world, because it's comfortable,
it's predictable, it's well ordered, and it covers over the anxiety, that kind of quivering
unease, that all human beings experience an unease that reminds us that there's something wrong
with us, that there's something disconnected or out of sync with us and the world. And it's
because we're conscious, it's because we're self aware that we're aware that we're going to die,
we're aware that God is dead, and there are no moral absolutes. And so I think existentialists
are just deeply attuned to the fragility and weakness of human beings, that we drift to religion,
we drift to comfort, we drift to social norms, because it shelters us and it protects us.
It's not a bad thing, it's just, it's structural to the human condition. But thankfully in life,
we have breakdown experiences, where that comfortable facade collapses and we're forced
to confront ourselves and face who we are. And that's why anxiety conditions, whether you call
it anxiety, if you're Kierkegaard or Nazia, if you're Sard, or absurdity, if you're Camus,
or the horror of the nothing, if you're Nietzsche, all of these experiences are edifying
experiences because they jolt us out of our rootinized drift and force us to face ourselves
and to face our existence. And so the existentialists do something counterintuitive, and that is
they tell us that anxiety is a good thing, it's a teacher, it's not something that should be
medicated necessarily, it's not something that should be controlled with cognitive behavioral
therapy necessarily. That's not to say that those things shouldn't be included in a treatment plan,
but we should listen and attend to those experiences because they're teaching us valuable lessons about
who we are. Because I always have heard that existentialism gets a bad rep for being too focused
on the negative, too focused on the dark, but I, similarly to what you've just said, have never
experienced like that. There's always been a sensation that it acknowledges and explores
the darker side that is inevitably going to be there, whether you're facing it or not.
And actually, if you're able to explore these different philosophies, these different perspectives
on the dark and really confront and really explore what that means for you, you are empowering yourself
in the way that nothing, no denial or no putting it to the side will ever, ever do.
And that's one of the recurring misconceptions about existentialism, that it's a dark,
brooding, navel-gazing philosophy. It's not at all. The idea is when you confront death and face death,
you awaken to the fact that life is not a dress rehearsal, that this is the only life you have
and confronting finitude, facing anxiety, injects a measure of intensity and urgency
and vitality into our existence that otherwise it wouldn't have. And this is why Nietzsche calls
his philosophy a gay science. It's a happy philosophy. It's not a morbid philosophy. It's
a joyful philosophy. And Kierkegaard will say the same thing, right, that when you confront death,
it opens us up to how precious and poignant and fragile every moment is, because it can
be snatched away from us at any time. And so in many ways existentialism, at least for me,
is the most life-affirming of all philosophies. It's not a death-focused philosophy at all. It's
reminding us of how precious each moment is and that we can't take any day for granted.
Now I jumped straight into existential philosophies and I am not as familiar with other philosophies.
So how would you distinguish between what differentiates existential philosophies from
other philosophies? Well, I mean, just in terms of academic specialties, in Anglo-American
philosophy, existentialism is completely marginalized because it doesn't focus on the
core issues of truth and knowledge and the nature of reality and what is the best,
what is good conduct, what ought we to do. Existentialism doesn't care about any of that
generally because the concern is not on philosophical abstractions. What is the
nature of beauty, truth, justice, the good life? No, actually that's not true. They're concerned
with the good life. The existentialist is concerned with what does it mean to be human?
What is existence? And so what the existentialists do is they shift the philosophical orientation
away from theoretical detachment where we theorize about abstract forms and turn our
attention to the concrete flesh and blood particulars of everyday life, which is what
existence engages or is involved in. And so it's a complete reversal of the traditional
philosophical orientation that we inherit from Plato and Aristotle and that gets refined and
consolidated with figures like Descartes and Kant. It's not a philosophy rooted in theoretical
reflection, it's a philosophy rooted in attentiveness to the concreteness of our existence, of our
being. And that means it focuses on the way we live every day, the moods we feel, the affective
experiences that shape us and shock us into awareness like those anxiety moods or nausea moods.
And so it's always been a kind of peripheral fringe philosophy in the UK and the United States,
obviously less so in the Golden Age of French philosophy and German philosophy in the 20s
and 30s and teens. But thankfully that's starting to change. And one of the drivers of this change
is a recognition that because existentialism focuses on concrete existence, it can expand the
philosophical perspective to include voices that have been traditionally marginalized in the
philosophical mainstream. So feminist philosophy, of course, was in many ways inaugurated by Simone
de Beauvoir. Critical race theory was deeply impacted by Frans Fanon who was a student of
Sartre and Beauvoir's and was influenced by Maurice Merleau-Ponte. And so these other forms of
philosophical approach that have never had a voice at the table are finally being seen as
bona fide philosophical perspectives that in my view are in many ways indebted to existentialism
by focusing on the concrete and the particular instead of abstract universal forms or essences.
I know this is me speaking from a completely biased perspective but I hear when you say that it
makes me find it hard to imagine why other philosophies have the ability to matter if we
haven't understood what it is to be ourselves. If we haven't understood the kind of existential
aspect of existence, why does it matter what's right or wrong if we don't know what we are?
Yeah, I totally agree. I mean, I find most of Anglophone philosophy quite boring and uninteresting
because of that. And as a teacher, the classes that excite the students and engage the students
and inspire the students are existentially themed courses because they're at that stage in life where
they're asking those questions. What am I doing? What is it about? Why am I majoring in this and
not in that? And how is this going to shape the future of my life? And so when we start talking
about Friedrich Nietzsche or Martin Heidegger or Jean-Paul Saag, the students resonate to these
questions because they're feeling them right now at age 18, 19, 20, 21 and they're going to have to
confront those really serious concerns. They're not so passionate about abstract metaphysical
speculation. Those are interesting and curious thought puzzles but they're curious in the same
way that I'm curious about getting good at chess or figuring out the New York Times crossword puzzle.
Those thought experiments or philosophical curiosities don't keep me up at night. They don't
wake me up at 3 a.m. where I'm jolted awake and I think what's the meaning of my life? That's
existentialism. That's more important. Yeah, there's a difference between intellectual
fascination, intellectual curiosity and kind of an inherent questioning that you're saying
kind of innately surfaces at certain times of life you're saying and in certain experiences,
for example, this really life-shattering or life-questioning experiences. Yeah, exactly.
And we have been obviously discussing the phenomenon but we have not been defining the
phenomenon. If that is possible, how would you define it? Well, existentialism as a technical
term is almost beyond a clear definition and it's an ism, as I write in my book, that really
is misleading. It's not like rationalism or empiricism or or scientism or naturalism.
It doesn't refer to a unified philosophical school
and the word wasn't introduced until the 1940s by Gabriel Marcell and
Marcell used that word to refer to the philosophies of Sartre and Beauvoir but existentialism as a
word didn't exist in the 19th century so Kierkegaard and Nietzsche and Dostoevsky and Tolstoy,
the word didn't even exist. But I think to get a sense of the overall contours of what the word
refers to, it refers to a philosophical focus on what it means to be human. What does it mean
for a human being to exist? And the idea is that we exist in a way that's fundamentally different
from the way this water bottle exists or this cell phone exists. We are not substances, we're not
static things that are objectively present to be studied. We are activities or processes or
happenings so existence is an event for humans. It's an event of self-making or self-fashioning.
We make ourselves who we are through the meaning-giving choices that we undertake
as our lives unfold. And this is what Sartre means when he says existence precedes essence.
There is no pre-given essence that determines who we are. We make ourselves who we are by
choices, by actions. And those actions are always constrained by our embodiment,
our social historical situation, our gendered or sexual situation. So it's not as if our
self-created, the activity of self-creation is completely unhinged. It's not completely undetermined.
It's situated and constrained by what the existentialists call facticity, the facticity of
who we are. And so what we do as humans is we are in a struggle or a tension between the
givens of our situation and our capacity to interpret and give meaning to those givens.
And the existentialists call that transcendence. So we're always in this tension between transcendence
and facticity. And that struggle is existence itself, right? I'm giving meaning to the fact that
I'm a man in the 21st century who's white and middle class and for the time being ambulatory
and able-bodied. And I'm going to have to interpret and give meaning to that factical determination
as it changes and shifts and is modified throughout the course of my life. And of course what that
means is that the process of self-making is finite. It's temporal. It comes to an end. In other words,
we make ourselves who we are with the recognition that that process of self-making is finite,
that we are beings on the way towards death. And we don't like that. That scares us. So oftentimes
we live in a way that is in denial or flight from our own finitude, from our own mortality.
And that's why most of our lives are inauthentic, or in the words of Sartre and Beauvoir, in bad faith.
We live in a state of self-deception most of our lives. And we think in the course of our lives
that there's something real and enduring and lasting about our existence. But the existentialists
want to remind us that there is nothing real, enduring or lasting about our existence. Our
existence is finite. And that's not a bad thing. It's just part of what it means to be human,
and we need to kind of own up to that. And so central to that process of authentic self-creation
is a kind of honesty, that we need to be honest with ourselves and cut away all of the layers of
self-deception that we carry with ourselves to protect us from the horror of our finitude,
the horror of our contingency. So one of the things that the existentialists say is that
we exist, but we don't have to exist. There's no reason for us to exist. We just happen to be
thrown into existence. And against the backdrop of our thrownness, we now have to make ourselves
into who we are. And that's a huge burden. That's the burden of freedom. It's dizzying and anxiety
provoking. And we don't like to accept that either. And that's why we like to be told what to do.
We like our priests to tell us what to do, our therapists to tell us what to do, our pop
psychologists to tell us how to live our lives. We don't want to do it on our own. And of course,
what the existentialists want to say is, you're always on your own anyway. You've got to be honest
with yourself. So that's the cliff notes version of existentialism. Hard to define, but there are
kind of central features built into it. Freedom, authenticity, temporality, all of these things
kind of undergird all of the existentialist philosophers. The problem, unfortunately, is that
some of the most significant voices in existentialism aren't philosophers at all.
They're novelists like Dostoevsky and Tolstoy. They're poets like Reiner Maria Rilke. They're
filmmakers like Akira Kurosawa. They're playwrights like Sartre and novelists like Beauvoir. And so
existentialism expands far beyond the academic world. It's not exclusive to philosophers.
It's open to anyone who's sincerely concerned about the human condition and is anxious about
what it means to be human and is trying to articulate and express that anxiety or that concern.
And there are also religious existentialists and atheistic existentialists. And so not all
existentialists are following Nietzsche's maxim that God is dead. Many of the most important
existentialists were theistic existentialists like Dostoevsky, like Paul Tillich, like Martin
Buber. And there are some existentialists that don't believe in free will, like Nietzsche. He
thinks free will is a fiction. It's an illusion. But most existentialists have some conception
of freedom, of free will. And so this is why it's so difficult to demarcate the boundaries
of what existentialism is. Yet there are these familiar names that are
going to generally be coming across when you're studying it, especially from an academic point
of view. And it's making me think who, how, how did these particular names get selected and
put into the textbooks? And why are they the ones kind of being regurgitated and shared,
not that there's anything not completely marvelous about what they're sharing and that they shouldn't
be shared? But why them? Why not anyone else? Because they're the ones that do it. They're the
ones that engage the human condition in the most powerful and accessible and visceral way.
And so other novelists may talk about the human condition in certain ways, but very few do it the
way Dostoevsky does it, in crime and punishment or in the Brothers Karamazah. Very few articulate
the experience of confronting death like Tolstoy does and the death of Ivan Iliac. Very few capture
the despair in the face of the dizzying abyss of existence like Soren Kierkegaard does and
sickness unto death. So these are the figures that engage the human condition in the most powerful
way. But there are other marginal figures or figures on the periphery that do it in different
ways. But in my view, they may not do it as well. And or some may not have been discovered yet,
who knows. But when it comes to the major figures, they're major for a reason. Because their legacy
is enduring and lasting because they tend to do it better than anyone else. And it being they
speak to that humanness within you to that unspeakable part of you, which is just craving
stimulation, craving questions, craving answers. And they allow this kind of internal communication
with that being. And that's why they're well, it's, it's, I mean, I don't know if it's craving
stimulation or craving answers. I mean, one of the things that the existentialist will say is that
craving for stimulation is actually a form of denial. We want to be stimulated and distracted
from our human condition. And there are no answers to the human condition. What the existentialist
want to do is put us in a state of questionability, that there is no answer to the question what it
means to be human. You have to find that for yourself. You have to give your life meaning.
So there are no, it is not as if the existentialist lays out a guidebook to being who you are.
That's the scary part about existentialism. It's up to you to find out what this means.
This is why Nietzsche, for instance, is so famous for cautioning his readers. Don't become
Nietzscheans. Don't follow me. Follow yourself. You need to, you need to carve out your existence
and give meaning to your existence in the way that matters to you. Nietzsche did it for himself,
but you're not Nietzsche. You have to do it in your own way. Kierkegaard calls this subjective
truth. It's a truth that no one else has access to. It's your truth that belongs to you. And
it's going to be inco-parent and unintelligible to anyone else. And that's why it's precious to
who you are. So one of the tricky things about existentialism is a philosophy, and actually
this is kind of true to philosophy in general. Answers aren't part of the project. The project
is to immerse yourself in the questions, or as Rilke says, live the questions, exist the questions,
and be comfortable in the mystery and the ambiguity of the human condition. The more we try to find
reasons or grounds for our existence, the further away from authenticity we drift. Does that make
sense? And that is my observation of what is causing people the deepest pain, is when they are
needing that answer to what ultimately can't be answered, because it is just life. It is just your
decision. You wake up each day and either do the very much similar thing that you did yesterday,
or you be a completely different version of yourself doing a completely different thing,
there is just infinite ambiguity if you're willing to experience it.
Yeah, and so I think one of the measures of authenticity or being true to ourselves
is to learn how to be comfortable with or to dwell in uncertainty, to dwell in mystery and
ambiguity, and don't recoil from it or don't try to control it and master it, but to immerse
yourself in it. And that is the human condition. It is a fundamentally ambiguous and uncertain
predicament. And the more we try to control it and manipulate it and master it, the more anxious
we become. And this is one of the key features of it in existential psychotherapy. The more you
try to control your anxiety, the more your anxiety takes control of you. The more you befriend your
anxiety and welcome your anxiety and dwell in it, the less control it has over you, the less
power it has over you. For someone that might be watching this and really sitting there struggling
with their mental well-being or with their experience of life, and they were hoping that
existential ideas might alleviate some of that, what would you recommend for them in terms of
either just exploration or particular sources? Well, it's hard for me to say because I'm not a
clinician and I'm not a mental health counselor. And I think it's a case-by-case situation. I think
one of the stereotypes of existentialism is that it's anti-psychiatry. And this is an orientation
that was really pioneered by figures like Artie Lang, who was deeply inspired by existentialism,
especially the work of John Paul Sarge. And the idea is that any medical intervention that
blunts or covers over our freedom or our confrontation with our condition is dehumanizing
and problematic. I don't think that's true at all. I think some people need pharmaceutical
assistance, medication. I think some people need instrumental psychotherapies like cognitive and
behavioral therapy. And so my approach to this from a mental health perspective is very much an
eclectic approach. You use what works. I think someone in the grips of full-blown panic and anxiety,
Nietzsche is not going to help that person. Kierkegaard's not going to help that person. In
fact, it could inflame the situation and amplify it. However, if the anxiety is controlled or
mediated in some sense with an antidepressant or with some form of cognitive and behavioral therapy,
that may allow that suffer to begin the hard work of existential psychotherapy. And so I would
certainly not employ existential psychotherapy as a first line of treatment in every situation
by any means. But I think existential psychotherapy has to be employed for lasting
change, to occur for lasting and significant transformation to happen and growth to happen.
And so yeah, I think that's kind of the way I would go about it.
Which could almost be summarized as saying work out on a kind of on an individual basis,
on a unique basis. And also I would argue in unique to each moment, because so I do work
as a practitioner and I'm obviously highly influenced by existential philosophies in my
work. But what I'm going to do with a client one day or how we will be together in a session
one day is going to be fundamentally different perhaps than the previous week or the next week.
And I feel that from my perspective, at least, there's something about having these philosophical
ideas, having these concepts, having these key themes, almost within myself as lenses or perspectives
to have as an alternative way to look, and especially a lot of it's rooted in not being able
to change, not being able to make a change. I think that's right. And I think one of the great
insights of existentialism is the recognition that anxiety and despair are not medical conditions.
They should be medicalized as discrete medical entities. They are structural to the human
condition. They're inescapable. Everyone is going to have powerful and life shattering
anxiety moments. And and many, most of us will have them over and over again throughout our lives
as we get to go through a divorce or our parents die or we lose our job or we suffer a
serious illness. All of those experiences are going to shatter us. And we're going to have
to confront ourselves. But to say that that experience of existential shattering or anxiety
in the face of our own finitude is a medical condition is really problematic in my view.
Because what the egg doesn't mean they shouldn't be treated and assisted with
with pharmaceuticals or or or CBT or something like this. What the existentialists want to
remind us is that these are instructive edifying opportunities for personal growth and transformation.
Right. They're awakenings. And if we just blunt these awakenings with with tranquilizers
or or are trained to not attend to them and and and avoid them, you're never going to have those
those transformative opportunities that that anxiety can bring to us.
Do you feel that there have been moments in your own life when this is applied?
Oh, God. Countless times in my life, every major breakdown, every crisis existentialism has helped
me. Three years ago, I had a massive heart attack while on a 60 mile bike ride, something I did
regularly. I was kind of a fitness advocate and and a health nut. And I had a massive heart attack.
And my whole world collapsed. My identity as a professor, my identity as a as a physically fit
middle aged man, my identity as a as a partner or in terms of my relationships.
And existentialism helped me work through that trauma and and come through the other side, I
think, as a better human being with a deeper perspective about life's frailty and precariousness
and woke me up to living with a sense of urgency and vitality and intensity that
it's you inevitably get sucked away from in the drift of professional life or or family obligations
and work obligations and so on. So existentialism has through throughout my life from from 18 years
old on, numerous breakdowns, divorce, you know, sicknesses, losses of friends to cancer and illness
has has pulled me through and and deepened my life and and opened up opportunities for growth
and transformation. And so it has been whether it's it's through existential literature or reading
Heidegger again or teaching Nietzsche and Jean-Paul Sard in the classroom. It's always been therapeutic
for me. I appreciate you sharing and I suppose because I'm socialized to think it I'm almost
instinctively when you hear someone's experience of trauma you want to instinctively say I'm so
sorry that you had that experience but I'm learning more and more and especially with you sharing this
this brilliant this growth beyond and these new insights that you gain from it. There's almost
a sense that well I'm not sorry that you had that experience in a way you're saying that it
contributed beautifully to your life. And that's actually the the great gift of existential philosophy
is that these these traumas and crises I mean you don't want you don't want to romanticize them you
don't want to romanticize suffering and that's always a temptation in existential philosophy that
he or she who suffers the most is the deepest and the most authentic that's just nonsense and I
don't think that's a right an accurate depiction of what the existentious are trying to do. But
the recognition that that that trauma and suffering and breakdowns awaken us to life's frailty and
its poignancy and remind us not to take our relationships for granted or our day for granted
that it could be snuffed out at any time are tremendously valuable life lessons and they
improve and enhance our lives they don't diminish it at all they make us in my view better people
more compassionate more understanding more sympathetic to the suffering of others and
and so so I I think you're right that that cliche I'm so sorry this happened I'm so sorry for your
loss those losses are opportunities for growth those those those deaths are our opportunities
for transformation and and Kierkegaard is great with this I mean Kierkegaard goes so far as to
say God wants you to die God wants you to die to the world because when you die to the world
the world comes back to you in a way that's more vibrant and intense and urgent than it was before
so so the idea is to die over and over throughout your life and every time you die the world comes
back with more vibrancy intensity and poignancy and and during that process you you prepare for
your actual death in Rilke's words you learn how to die which is the the most important lesson that
a philosopher can teach how can you learn how to die I'm I'm aware that it could be really easy for
someone to for someone to sit here and hear this and think it will it's so easy for you guys to
speak theoretically about embracing the opportunities that suffering provides but hey I'm sitting here
with a real-life experience of suffering and I have no idea how to how how do we do that especially
when we haven't had you know the advantage of years of actual philosophical engagement
yeah it's a it's a very difficult question I mean some people won't most people most people will live
lives of deep suffering and meaninglessness and that's just the part of the predicament of being
human many people live sad ordinary lives that are bereft of deep meaning and significance
Tolstoy says it great in the in the death of Ivan Iliak he says Ivan Iliak lived an ordinary
simple life and therefore it was a life that was most terrible and that's the life that most of us
will live and this is why I think Natalie projects like the ones that you're doing which are trying
to give voice to this the importance of existentialism are so important education is important good
liberal arts humanities education is important reading great literature watching good film
listening to good music those are all important edifying experiences that speak to the human
condition in so far as those those movies and and pieces of literature and and and pieces of music
speak to the human condition and so again you know sadly most of us are going to suffer
and and not have the wisdom that the existential tradition can open and open us up to and one
of the things that I do in my work is I try to popularize existentialism by writing about it
and by giving talks on it and by giving going to conferences and being a Pied Piper to my students
about how important these these questions and ideas are and so I try to incorporate that wisdom
into everything that I do in my conversations with my friends with my partner with my colleagues
reminding them that this this petty squabble about academic bureaucracy doesn't really matter
don't get hung up on it because you're going to die and you're going to die at any time and so put
yourself put things in perspective what really matters in the grand scheme of things and Irvin
Yalam the great existential psychotherapist refers to this as trivializing the trivial
we realize that these things that we worry about most of the time in our lives are trivial stupid
wastes of time that there are much bigger more significant issues on the table like
living a meaningful life and and being a decent human being and how generally does that go down
when you're engaging with people who are are living in the trivial who are embracing the
trivial conversations and you're like hold up you know that is trivial let's let's talk about
something it's a really good question I mean you have to be careful because it's not going to register
for most people I mean most people like Kevin he's so dramatic I mean he's such an intellectual
he's always talking about these heavy things but if you're if you're sensitive and mindful to the
speaking position of other people you can do it in ways that are thoughtful and and sensitive
and so you don't want to bludgeon someone with existential philosophy and say wake up wake up
you can be thoughtful by asking questions like what does that mean for you why is this worrying
you why is this concerning to you with my students it's a little bit different I can be a little bit
more blunt because I am a teacher and they're learning this material so I can shove it down
their throats whether they like it or not but with my friends and my family and my colleagues
you have to be a little bit more indirect and and thoughtful and recognize that these ideas
are quite scary and can be terrifying if you've never dipped your toe into existential philosophy
before and that most of our culture is built in such a way as to deny these concerns
right that that most of our cultural institutions are set up in a way that we don't have to face
the the the existential givens right we don't have to face death we don't have to face absurdity we
don't have to confront anxiety and and um and so so you you want to be cautious in terms of how
you bring this up but but oftentimes it means that I just cut some people out of my life if
they're not willing to engage so I I don't have a lot of friends maybe for that reason but it's
the same reason why I don't have friends who are Donald Trump supporters I just there's no reason
for me to waste my time with someone who is a dogmatic follower of dog Donald Trump I have
nothing really to say to them in the same way that it'd be very hard for me to try to gently
broach the idea that maybe God is an invention to someone who is deeply ensconced in a religious
faith and their identity hinges on the idea that God has to exist it'd be very hard for me to
disentangle that person from those deeply held convictions I could suggest some literature
maybe some books but it wouldn't be a conversation that I'd be interested in having
I remember really early on in my training one of the lecturers must have just supervised some
students because it was obviously quite fresh for her but she was saying that they'd conducted
their entire thesis on the potentially damaging and and ending results that engaging in existential
philosophy can have on interrelationships be that with partners intimate relationships with friends
with family members because it you know we speak about you spoke there about choosing to move away
but it almost becomes and I've spoken with colleagues it almost becomes intolerable not
to think deeply not to see things as trivial when they are trivial yeah I agree and I and I think
and I don't want to be harsh about this but um it's okay to cut people out of your life that
have no that that aren't that aren't bringing meaning and value to your existence and and
with family members it's much more difficult because there are our long-standing connections of
intimacy but I I don't have much problem disconnecting from friends that don't really
see the relevance of these kinds of questions or concerns and I also have a very hard time with
small talk and gossip it makes me very uncomfortable so so going to cocktail parties or where people
are just talking about trivial things that makes me quite anxious and unnerved and and I don't like
that but if a conversation at a party is involving real serious existential questions I'll be there
all night and and I'll be passionate about the conversation and so so um uh it for me it's a
temperamental orientation temperamentally I I I I'm very uncomfortable with with with surface
conversation it makes me it makes me quite anxious and it's the same thing at faculty meetings or
department meetings I'm a department chair so I have to deal with a lot of bureaucracy and
deal with upper administration those meetings I I can't stand I have a very difficult time
sitting through that because I see the the the vast waste of time that these meetings suck up
in a life and I think okay there's another two hours of my life that I'll never get back that
that didn't contribute anything to my to my sense of who I am and so I think some people maybe you're
like this uh Natalie that that temperamentally you're just drawn to these ideas it's not something
that you can really help it's just it's it's it's it's part of your your constitution
and I can confidently say that you have just validated so many of my peers experiences there
too when you say you struggle with small talk and and gossip and and I had wondered if that's
just because everyone's just coming to the end of this huge huge doctorate journey which is
exhausting and overwhelming in itself but perhaps it is part of this it might be part of a deeper
existential orientation and you know again if if if a group of friends are sitting around
talking about really important life issues I I'm drawn to that like a laser beam and and I will
listen and nod my head and contribute where I can but if the conversation is about politics or sports
or redecorating a house or installing a backyard gazebo I or what restaurant is good or or who's
coming to town in terms of a band or something I could care less I just I my eyes glaze over
I mean I can play the game and put on the mask of sociability as good as anyone but um
when I go home I'll feel deflated and upset that I lost a few more hours of my life
and I'm not sure if you noticed it but I want to reflect back that you said it's those conversations
and those meetings which don't contribute to who I am and that is what is antagonizing and
frustrating about them yeah and that's not to say that I don't willfully do it and I know it's
important work to keep a university going and I know that we have to put on masks to keep the
machinery of society lubricated and well oiled and and it's also not a judgmental thing I may
come off like I'm being judgmental it's it's it's it's who I am it's I can't help it and I
I think some people love small talk and they love gossip and they love cocktail party
conversations it's just something that I can't bear it's very difficult for me it takes a
tremendous amount of energy to maintain myself at a three or four hour long dinner party where
the conversation is just idle chatter it's I mean I have to have two or three glasses of wine
just to take the edge off and and cope and that may that may be revealing more about me than I
want to suggest but it's it's who I am yeah I don't think it's it's judgmental that it came
across I feel like it was very honest but it makes me realize we don't perhaps often get the
opportunity to express in a safe space honestly what does and doesn't work for us in life we are
often involved with situations that are just part of the pattern of existence and we we tolerate them
and we put our masks on and we we navigate them because we we feel that we have to and I think
that's a great point Natalie and I think my my my personal view is that everyone deep down is
craving for these conversations these deep serious conversations about the meaning of life
but they're scary they're they're frightening conversations because they expose so much that
we want to keep hidden but I think all of us it's I think it's it's it's built into the human
condition we we we are thirsting for these encounters these deep intimate relational
encounters what what Martin Buber calls the IU relation where we're open and exposed to the
other person and this is what draws people to therapy this is why people go into to therapy
because they want to be heard they want to have to have someone listen to them in a way that's
sincere and open and they feel safe in that space in that therapeutic encounter and and that
safety oftentimes isn't there at us at a social gathering or at a party but the more intimate
that that social gathering gets and the more close knit that community of friends and and
relations is the greater the opportunity for deeper conversations and and and more penetrating
discourse
and I wonder where it is in life that we do become so scared of confronting these questions because
if you think about children children are constantly just exploring all of many facets of
themselves all the many potentials of what life has to offer and they do it with such
just innate fearlessness yeah I think we we it gets socialized out of us I think you're right
I think children are always the best philosophers they're always philosophically inquisitive
and and even inquisitive about the deepest and scariest questions about death you know what
happened to our dog what happened to grandma where do they go after they die why why why
and as as as young children get socialized in in in school and in educational institutions
in in peer relations they're kind of told you don't ask those questions anymore you do what
good boys and girls do and and that's a that's sad that's unfortunate and and so we we lose touch
with that wide-eyed openness to the questionability of life that all children have and it gets beaten
out of us and then there's moments in I think late adolescence early adulthood when it wake
when we're woken up again and that's often is happens when you go off to college when you leave
home for the first time right either going to college or go off and and practice a trade at 18
or 19 and you leave the home and suddenly those questions come up again who am I what's the meaning
of my life and um and and and then we get our degree and we get our job and we start our
career we forget those questions until we get our divorce or we we lose our job or we get a
critical illness and then we're woken up again and um so I think that that the experience of
questionability that children have uh comes back to us at different points in our lives I also think
it comes back to us in at the end of life that the older we get the more humble we get the more
open we get toward mystery and and questionability and I'm actually finishing a book right now on
existentialism and aging and argue that the aging process and the intimacy that aging brings us with
grief and loss actually makes us into existentialists I think elder the elderly folk
tend to be more receptive to these ideas uh and there's a lot of interesting uh evidence to suggest
this that we we actually become existentialists the closer we get to death and the more our future
contracts and we realize that we are temporal beings and life is coming to an end
you've set my mind off in a thousand different questions that I need to to keep it straight
and you're speaking about different literature we've got you know we've got theoretical literature
we've got philosophical perhaps novels and you've mentioned poetry and film what about for the
person who's sitting there and it's like yeah these these russian or french and western philosophers
um that they're not my style like there's no way I could engage with those kind of texts I'm not
interested in classical music I'm not a deep person I'm not a hugely academic or intellectual
yeah it's a it's a good question I think yeah some people just aren't readers some people aren't
intellectually inclined I think one of the great entry ways into existential thinking if you're not
a literary type is through film I think there's a lot of really great accessible films that
capture the core ideas of existential philosophy and and some of them are blockbusters with some
of the great stars in Hollywood and so what what film can do is it can demystify the alienating
and intimidating jargon of the existentialists the german terms and the french terms and the
technical language that may be a sartre or a bouvoir or a heidegger would employ um and uh
I'm thinking of of movies like American Beauty this is the movie by Sam Mendes
um The Tree of Life by Terrence Malick um there's a great Nietzschean themed science fiction film
called Arrival um uh that was directed by Villeneuve um Akira Kurosawa the great japanese director
of course has done so many great existential films the greatest is probably Ikuru um about a man who's
who's diagnosed with terminal cancer and he's forced to confront a life that has been largely
bereft of meaning and now he's kind of awakened to the urgency of the limited time that he has left
and so I think film is a great way to introduce and and these films are cross-cultural it's not
as if these are just western filmmakers I mean Ikuru I mean I'm sorry Kurosawa had such a massive
impact on western filmmakers that in many ways he was the pioneer not not not hollywood or or
french or or american filmmakers and Ingmar Bergman films of course uh anything that Bergman does
some Woody Allen films are good although he has demonstrated himself to be a loathsome human being
um so that's one way to do it uh is is through indirectly through film
and I think that's hugely reassuring and partly what this project is aspiring to do because there
isn't for me an obvious go-to place to say I've heard this word this ism as you were speaking
about it doesn't it's coming up a lot it seems that it could be something curious but I am not
able to read these huge huge tomes I I don't know where to start I don't know where to go
and it feels that there's there's there's not just that's kind of stepping stone that opens the door
that says actually you know yes okay we there are so many ways to be it highly academic about this
and explore it from a highly academic position and and encourage that to be incorporated into
different professions and different disciplines but actually we don't have to be so so formal
about it too we can sit back at the cinema we can have a conversation with friends we can just
look at ourselves and say hey who am I and you could show this interview right I mean this I mean
hopefully we're not using too much highfalutin language we're talking in a way that I think
everyone could understand and I think even those that aren't that are intimidated by the big novels
The Crime and Punishment The Brothers Karamazah many of the most powerful and visceral pieces
of existential literature are very short stories the short stories of the death of Yon Ilyak it's
you know 50 page story Camus the stranger is a very short story Dostoevsky has a bunch of
short stories that are that are powerful and accessible the plays of Jean-Paul Sartre are
accessible and pretty easy to follow and so it's not as if you have to to sit down with a thousand
page piece of Russian literature to absorb the core ideas you can breeze through you know
Camus the stranger at the beach in an afternoon and be jolted into an awareness of of who we are
you know and and so there's no reason to be scared of it it's it's accessible in so many
different kinds of ways I like how you set the setting there like you can just read a
read a nice novel on the beach because you make me realize that it there's almost this sense that
philosophy must be done in in a in a dark room with a with a cigar or a brand out in the dark
or in the woods or in a classroom but actually I live in Florida I do most of my work at the beach
right or outside in the sunshine and and so absolutely yeah we don't have to play that
that stereotype of the the serious French intellectual the beret and the black sweater
and smoking a cigarette at the coffee shop and it's it's a it can be much more relaxed
and and I think it's very accessible and I reckon it was at the time for them as well
if half of them were writing at cafes and coffee shops and bars and having these chats and just
writing it down scribbling it down and I believe to an exact I mean in in the golden age in the
in the 1940s and 50s in France it was everywhere I mean existentialism was in the air and it was
in the coffee shops in the in the in the cafe society on the sidewalks but it was also in
the air in the United States in that way it was a big driver of the counterculture revolution and
and you know Camus and and Sartre and Beauvoir were such important political voices and in speaking to
the Vietnam War to to the civil rights movement to the women's movement it was an important part
of the new left in in Great Britain and so it was it was in the air it wasn't it wasn't isolated
in in academic settings it wasn't there in seminar halls it was it was out in the streets
is where existentialism had its had its high point and it'd be wonderful to see that come back in
some ways and there are sun glimmers of hope that that's the case I mean there's there's aspects of
the Black Lives Matter movement at the United States the Mitu movement
the Greta Greta Thernbergs climate strike movement that have real resonances to to existential philosophy
uh in terms of conveying the urgency of our situation and so my sense is that existentialism
is at a is is is coming back it's coming back uh in and uh being received in ways that it that it
hasn't in the past coming back from textbooks and academia into kind of common dialogue and discourse
yeah and also yeah I think coming back from from uh a complacency in the face of neoliberal politics
and um uh crass materialism I think that that there's nothing like the recognition that the
planet may be uninhabitable in 40 years to jolt us into an awakening and I see this a lot with my
students I'm not gonna I'm 51 years old so the the urgency of the climate change isn't going to hit
me as viscerally but for my 20 year old students they may be living in a planet that is radically
different than the one that I'm living in when they're my age and so when we talk about neolism
or the death of God and the search for meaning um the climate change crisis can can uh jolt us
into an awareness of those kinds of questions and you're bringing us here nicely back into this
discussion that existentialism isn't just theoretical it's not just within our mind but it's
within our embodied world as well it's in the physical world as well and yeah what this leads
back into is what you were sharing about your own your own uh specialities yeah absolutely and my
and my own life I mean it's it's it's shaped me in deep ways in my own life it's pulled me through
profound catastrophic events in my life uh near-death events and and uh if anything my relationship
to this kind of philosophy is more intimate and profound than it's ever been and it's very much
different from the the place that I was when I was an 18 or 20 year old uh philosopher enamored by
Nietzsche and the radical ideas because I hadn't lived them I hadn't lived these ideas I hadn't
experienced them in the visceral way that you know 30 years of life experience teaches you
and so the wisdom of these thinkers has has become even more pronounced as I've gotten older
and I don't think that's going to change much I think it's it's going to become more pronounced
as I move into my 60s and 70s if I get there if I make it to tomorrow you see it does feel like an
endless absolutely endless uh journey this the the discovery and exploration of the existential
field I don't I I was going to say I don't know if I love it or I hate it but I think it's definitely
that I love it and it's just any person that you speak to has the potential and quite often does
add a whole mother open door after door after door and you look through and you think wow there's so
much more and I think even the language of love and hate as you know uh is is so is a little bit
misleading it's it's not that you love it or hate it is that it matters to you it matters to you
deeply and so those simple binaries of good and evil or love and hate they it doesn't capture
the ambiguity of of what this field discloses and um all that you can say with sincerity is that this
this material means something to me in a deep way uh even if articulating that meaning is always
going to be inchoate and unclear to the point that people like ourselves are just so inspired
that we dedicate a significant amount of our life to trying to share that or at least invite or as
I would say offering we're offering other people the opportunity to to explore these I really like
Natalie this idea of existential offering I think there's such a wonderful uh openness about that
phrase what can I offer you and and how can I open you up to the relevance and significance
of these ideas I think that's a a really neat part of the project thank you I I thought of that when
I was when I was sitting during my training and I was just being exposed to all of these different
ideas and I was trying to establish which one I'm supposed to resonate with which particular theory
and how I'm supposed to take it all on board and it suddenly dawned on me that that's not at least
for me that's not what existential philosophies are about they're so magnificently vast and complex
and they will have completely different meanings to each person in each moment depending on where
their situation is and it each one offer an opportunity and offer a different angle and
it's up to us whether we take it or leave it or put it aside for later I agree I agree on that note
how would you describe your existential offering as it were um I guess my existential offering
would in the in the bluntest possible way recognize that this life is not a dress rehearsal
this is the only life you have this day is the only day that is exist that exists right now and
remind yourself or be vigilant to the idea that this this is this existence is precarious
and it's unstable and it's uncertain and that you can't take things for granted
you can't you can't take these relationships for granted you can't take the beauty of a sunset
or a rainy afternoon for granted a good meal for granted or a good cup of coffee
treasure those moments because they can be snatched away from you at any time and I think
recognizing that life is not a dress rehearsal will will bring a measure of intensity and urgency
to aspects of our life that we all too often take for granted
and why is that intensity and urgency so so important
well because it reminds us of how beautiful and precious this life is and and mysterious
and gracious this life is and um if if you're happy with your an existence where you're just
pulled along by the shallows of everyday life um so much the better for you but my sense is that
most of us don't want to live that way we want to live with a sense that this is a life worth living
that this is a life that can have deep meaning if we so choose regardless of the career path that
we take it can be embodied in our relationships in the care that we have for our our our sick and
dying parents the way that we love and take care of our children uh or the environment or the natural
world uh and so um my sense is without that measure of intensity and urgency it's not as much of a
life worth living unfortunately I pick up on how you're saying I sense I sense I sense and is this
what you were referring to in in your in your work earlier when you were saying that this embodied
we're embodied beings as well we're phenomenological beings as well we're not just these yeah yeah I
mean one of the things one of the great insights of the existentialists is that the human condition
is disclosed to us not through theoretical reflection it's disclosed to us through feelings
through moods through affective experience and um we the the the argument or the suggestion is that
we we feel when we're inauthentic and that feeling is knowledge we know when we're not being true to
ourselves we know when we're wearing we're wearing masks and and being self-deceptive how do we know
it feels a certain way you see and we are feeling authenticity also feels a certain way uh it we
feel a particular kind of mood that's atmospheric and it colors our our our entire life
you see it's making me think of how many times we can have this feeling and one that we're not
finding pleasant and one that we're wanting to change and we're finding uncomfortable when
but we're we're staying we're living with it we can do that for for hours or weeks or months or
years we can live with this sense that we our life is not is not being lived and experienced in the
way that perhaps it should be but yet we're not changing it and that is that embodied sense of
discomfort and i think that you know one of the one of the the underlying themes i think in in
almost all existential philosophy is is courage that you have to have the courage or or steadiness
to be true to who you are and and whenever you feel yourself get sucked back into a life of
self-deception which is always going to happen it's inevitable it's again it's structural to the
human condition uh in authenticity to have the courage to to question that temptation uh to
challenge it to remind yourself what is at stake in life to remind yourself that this is a day that
you may not get that that the future is an illusion you don't get it tomorrow but tomorrow's not guaranteed
and so why are you going to go to that cocktail party why are you going to join that committee
why are you going to waste that time in a in a conversation that's going to have no bearing
on your existence is there is there other better ways to live better ways to spend the very limited
time that you have on earth how in those situations do you have the courage to keep going um it's a
good question uh i i remind myself every day i try to remind myself with a mantra every day
life is short life is short be grateful life is short be grateful i'll say that actually in my car
when i'm driving to work and when i'm walking onto campus i'll be remind i'll remind myself be
grateful this day this day this is the only day and it's hard sometimes you know you get sucked
into the things they sucked into everydayness and and you lose touch with that but i try to
develop a kind of practice this is what what Aristotle calls frenesis it's a practical wisdom
that becomes habit it becomes part of who you are so you don't have to try anymore to be grateful
you don't have to try anymore to to uh uh be aware of your own temporality or your own finitude
it it's it just becomes who you are and so you see the sunsets in florida differently you see the
blue sky in a different way you see the trees on campus in a different way and um uh that's that's
practical wisdom and i hugely appreciate your honesty with that with that question because
i think confronting confronting truth confronting life confronting existence
can be exhausting and overwhelming and there are moments that we don't just innately have
that courage flaring up within us to keep going and to keep exploring but what you're
sharing here is that this is not just a passive process this is an active engagement
that's right and that's again a central theme in in existentialist philosophy i mean
sart and buvor actually call it engage literature that the the writing has to be engaged with the
concrete realities of existence and we have to bring that engagement into our own lives
so that it's not just something that we scribble down on a page it's something that we embody
in in our everyday lives and and it's hard work it's very difficult because self-deception is
very easy it's easy to be inauthentic and it's nice it's comforting and and and tranquilizing
as heidegger says and also that it you know we we go through that phase where it was respectful to
be to tranquilize ourselves it was respectful to switch off our questioning brain and to cue
up in the playground and and sit down in the classroom and study something that isn't
connecting with you we're trained to do that and you're you're told off if you're not and you're
being respectful if you do and then suddenly it all changes again and yeah i agree i agree
but thank you so much for sharing today kevin i'm wondering was it a real pleasure to have this
conversation and i hope that whoever sees it appreciates it as well and it was really
fun for me to have this talk and may hopefully our paths will cross sometime in real life
in the future i'm sure we'll make that happen and i'm sure it will inspire i hope so too
thank you so much kevin it's my pleasure okay we'll talk soon bye bye bye
you